|CyberSecurity Notes|
---------------------

|Navigation in Linux|
---------------------
cd: Changes your current directory. To use it type: "cd path/to/directory" Typing "cd" or "cd~" will go to the home directory and "cd.." will go back one directory.
ls: This command lists the contents of the directory you are in. Typing "ls -l" will display detailed listing and "ls -a" will show hidden files.
pwd: Prints the current directory your in, e.g. if you're in the "home/siraaj/Documents/" directory it will print out "home/siraaj/Documents"
mkdir: Creates a new directory, to use it type: "mkdir [directory name]"
rmdir: Removes any EMPTY directory, to use it type: "rmdir [directory name]"
mv: Moves a file to a specefied directory, to use it type: "mv yourfile.txt destination/of/file" Another use is to rename it by typing: "mv oldname.txt newname.txt"
rm: Removes a file or directory, to use it type: "rm yourfile.txt" Another use is "rm -r" which deletes a specific directory and its contents, "rm -f" which removes file without confirmation.

|Networking|
------------
IP address (IPv4): An IP address is what is used by devices to connect and communicate with each other. IPv4 is a type of IP address which has 4 sets of number each separated by a period, e.g., 123.456.7.8.

Subnet Masks: Subnet masks are used with IP addresses to divide a network into smaller subnetworks, or subnets. The subnet mask helps to determine the difference between the host and network portions of the IP address.

Gateway: A gateway is used as a sort of doorway between different networks. The gateway helps to connect the two networks together and then directs the data to where it needs to go.

DNS: Domain Name System or DNS is a system that changes domain names like www.google.com to their IP address version.

Network Switch: A network switch connects different devices together and then manages the data transfer between them.

Network Router: A network router is like a network switch, but it directs data based on IP addresses and is on Layer 3, whereas the network switch operates at Layer 2 (data link layer).

Access Points: An access point is a piece of hardware that allows wireless-capable devices connect to a wired network.

MAC address: MAC address is a unique identifier that is used at Layer 2 to identify devices on a local network. This is important so data gets sent to the right device on a wireless network.

Ports: A port is an endpoint which allows a computer to send and receive information. Ports are identified by their specific number called the port number and helps to direct network traffic.

Types of Networks
WAN: Wide Area Network, as its name suggests it covers a wide area, buildings, cities, and even countries.
LAN: Local Area Network, it is a type of network that covers a smaller area, usually a building, office or campus.
PAN: Personal Area Network, it has the smallest range of all the networks, it is meant for immediate connectivity with personal devices like your phone and smart watch.
MAN: Metropolitan Area Network, a type of network which spans an area like a city or large campus. It provides connectivity between different locations in the same metropolitan region.
VPN: Virtual Private Network, it allows for secure and private communication on a public network. It creates a secure encrypted connection between the user and an external server.

|Networking Commands|
---------------------
ifconfig: This command displays the configurations of a netowork interface, like network masks and IP adresses.
ip: A command can be used for managing and configuring network interfaces, IP adresses, etc.
traceroute: Traces the route that data packets take from your computer to a destination. It shows each network hop along the way.
tracepath: Similiar to traceroute but it uses ICMP Echo Request packets exclusively, whereas traceroute uses UDP and ICMP Echo Request Packets.
ping: This command sends an ICMP Echo request to a specefied IP address and checks if and how long it takes to reach it and come back.
netstat: Displays different network information, like listening ports, active connections, netowork statistics, etc.
ss: Similiar to netsat, it shows detailed information about established connections and network statistics.
dig: This command queries DNS servers to get domain name info, such as the IP address.
nslookup: This command also queries DNS servers to retrieve info about domain names.
route: This command allows you to view and manipulate the IP routing table of a system, which includes modifying, adding, and deleting network routes.
host: This command can translate domain names to IP adresses and vice versa.
arp: Displays and can modify the Address Resolution Protocol(ARP) cache which maps IP adresses to MAC addresses
iwconfig: Show configuration settings of a wireless network interface, like signal strength and encyption settings.
hostname: Displays the hostname of a system, which identifies the device on a network.
curl/wget: Downloads files from a network using protocols like HTTP, HTTPS, or FTP.
mtr: The functionality of both ping and traceroute, monitors the network path and provides realtime statistics.
whois: This command gets the registration information about a domain name or IP address from WHOIS databases.
ifplugstatus: Checks if a network interface is plugged in or unplugged.
iftop: Monitors and displays real-time data about network traffic on a network interface.
tcpdump: Captures network traffic in real time and allows you to examine packets and their contents; used mainly for troubleshooting.


|EXTRA|
-------
TCP: Transmission Control Protocol, connects using a TCP Hanshake, which is from the client, SYN(synchronize packet), server responds 
with SYN-ACK(synchronize-acknowledge), and then sender sends ACK which completes the handshake. After that, TCP can be used for safe and secure data transfer.
To terminate the connection, the sender sends a FIN(finish) packet. Since its more secure, TCP could be used for accessing bank info.

UDP: UDP is much faster and doesn't establish a connection first. The tradeoff for this is that is much less secure, as it doesn't
track to see if the packets makes it to the destination. UDP could be used in things where quick data transfer is necessary, like streaming, gaming, or IoT applications.

|GIT COMMANDS|
--------------
git init : initialize repository
git config --global user.name "Name" : configure username
git config --global user.emal "email@email.com" : configure email
git status : check status, what files are tracked, untracked, etc.
git add filename : stage file
git add . : stage all untracked files
git log : view log
git checkout -b branch-name : create and switch branch
git checkout branch-name : switch branch
git merge branch-name : merge branches
git branch -d branch-name : delete branch
git restore filename : undo changes in working directory (newer versions)
git checkout --filename : undo changes in working directory (older versions)
git rm --cached filename : remove cached file
git config --global alias.alias-name command : set an alias for commmand
git tag -a v.10 -m "message" : add a tag to a commit
git reset --soft HEAD~1 : reset commits
git reset --hard HEAD~1 : reset commits